The Fermi Likelihood Model Editor (modeleditor)


Name
  modeleditor

Introduction

This program allows the user to create model files for use as input to
the Fermi likelihood estimation program. The model files are XML
files, and thus plain text, but the format is moderately complex, and
must be followed precisely. This program eases that process by
allowing the user to concentrate on correct data input, leaving the
task of proper data formatting to the program. This program also
provides limited capability to convert likelihood model files to the
format required by the Fermi observation simulator, which uses a
different XML format for model files.

Outline of Use

The user will typically use modeleditor to prepare a file of source
models for input the the Fermi likelihood estimator. This is a
critical step in the analysis of Fermi data, and is an iterative
process. Once the user has prepared a model file, the likelihood
program computes the likelihood that this particular set of models can
give rise to the observed data. The model parameters are then adjusted
until a high-likelihood scenario is found.

Example of Usage

The user has a set of Fermi data which she suspects contains several
point sources against the diffuse gamma-ray background. She wants to
develop a model that has a high likelihood of representing the data.

She begins by launching the model editor from the command line:

...
modeleditor
...

When the main window appears, a single default point source has
already been added to the source list for this model. She edits the RA
and DEC fields in the Spatial Model parameter grid to coincide with
the suspected location of one of the point sources in the field of
data. For example, she suspects a point source at (RA,DEC)=(2,73)
(which is an actual EGRET source 3EG J0010+7309, at
(RA,DEC)=(2.56,73.17). She therefore enters '2' in the RA value field
(row with 'name' of 'RA', column with heading of 'value'), and '73' in
the DEC value field. She suspects that this source is somewhat softer
than the default source, so she changes the Index value field in the
Spectrum parameter editor from the default value of -2.1 to the value
-1.9. Since this is intended as a starting guess, she leaves the
'free' checkbox for Index checked, so that the likelihood program can
adjust the index parameter to achieve the best fit to the data. She
does the same for the Prefactor parameter, so that the best flux
estimate can be obtained. She then changes the name of this source to
"Gamma suspect 1".

She now wants to add another source. She selects Add Source from the
Source menu, and a new default point source is created and added to
the list box on the left of the window. She selects that source in the
list box, and the default parameters populate the editor. She again
adjust the value of the Index parameter, this time to a steeper value
(-2.2). She also updates the values of the RA and DEC fields to
correspond to the suspected source location. She changes the name of
this source to "Gamma suspect 2". She repeats this process for each
suspected point source in the field, giving each a unique name.

She then wants to account for the diffuse background emission, so she
selects Add EGRET Diffuse Source from the Source menu.

She then changes the name in the Title field to "Suspected Gamma
Sources". Finally, she selects Save from the File menu. She navigates
to her data directory, and saves the file with the name
"suspect1.xml".

She then decides to tweak her model a bit by using a different diffuse
background. She selects EGRET Diffuse Source from the source list,
then selects Remove Source from the Source menu. She then selects Add
GALPROP Diffuse Source from the Source menu. She then saves the edited
model file under a new name, by selecting Save As... from the File
menu, and entering "suspect2.xml". She then selects Exit from the File
menu to exit from the Model Editor.

At this point, the files suspect1.xml and suspect2.xml are ready for
submission to the likelihood estimator.

Reference

Launching the program

The program is launched from the command line by invoking Python:

...
modeleditor.py [path]model.xcm==ml
...

where [path] is the (optional) path to an existing model file to be
edited, here denoted by model.xml. If no existing file is specified, a
default model is created, and may be edited.

Screen controls

N.B.: Context-sensitive help is available for all on-screen
controls. Moving the mouse over any screen element will invoke a popup
balloon containing a capsule summary of the function of that screen
element.

Source selection box

This box on the left side of the window contains a scrolling list of
sources in the current model file. Each source is identified by a
unique name. When a source is selected by clicking on its name in the
list box, the parameters for that source are used to populate the
editor on the right side of the window. Most of those parameters may
then be edited. When a source is selected in the list box, the
Source/Remove Source menu item may be selected to remove that source
from the list of sources.

Title entry

This entry field displays the title of the collection of sources in
the current file. Note that this is not the same as the name of the
file. The user may edit this title by editing the contents of the
title entry field.

Source Name entry

This entry field displays the name of the currently selected source in
the source selection box. The user may edit this name by editing the
contents of the Source Name entry field.

Source Type label

This (fixed) label displays the current source type: PointSource or
DiffuseSource. It is not editable by the user.

Spectrum Type menu button

This popup button displays the type of spectrum used for this
source. A new spectrum type may be selected by pressing the popup
button, and selecting one of the displayed spectrum types. When a new
spectrum type is selected, the parameters displayed in the spectrum
parameter grid immediately below the spectrum type button are updated
to reflect the new spectrum type, using all default values. The
different spectrum types are described in the documentation for the
likelihood tool (gtlike), so please refer to that document for more
information.

(Spectrum) File entry

This field displays the path to a data file used by the spectrum. This
field is only used by the FileFunction spectrum type. For other
spectrum types, this field is deactivated. When active, the user may
edit the path by editing the contents of this entry field.

(Spectrum) Browse button

This button summons a standard file dialog allowing the user to browse
to a file to use for the current FileFunction spectrum. This file
dialog functions in the standard "file/open" fashion for whichever
platform the modeleditor is running on. This provides a convenient
alternative to editing the text in the adjacent file entry field.

(Spectrum) Parameter Editor grid

This grid contains 7 rows and six columns. Each row corresponds to one
parameter which characterizes the current spectrum, and each column
corresponds to one of the 6 attributes of the parameter (name, value,
scale, min, max, free). The name column contains the name of the
current parameter, and this field may be freely edited (but the
likelihood code will probably not behave correctly if you change the
parameter names). The value column contains the unscaled value of the
parameter, and the scale column contains the scale factor for the
parameter. The product value*scale is the actual quantity used by the
likelihood software. The min and max columns display the allowed
minimum and maximum values for the value column (the unscaled
values). These fields are "live"; changing the value field
automatically invokes a range check using the min and max fields, and
the user is prevented from entering bad or out-of-range values. If the
user wishes to enter a value outside of the current range, the min
and/or max fields should be edited prior to editing the value
field. The final column (free) contains checkboxes. When a checkbox is
checked, that parameter is marked as adjustable by the likelihood
code, and will be modified to provide the best likelihood
estimate. The value specified in the value field is used as the
starting value for that parameter for the computation.

SpatialModel Type menu button

This popup button displays the type of spatial model used for this
source. A new spatial model type may be selected by pressing the popup
button, and selecting one of the displayed spatial model types. When a
new spatial model type is selected, the parameters displayed in the
spectrum parameter grid immediately below the spatial model type
button are updated to reflect the new spatial model type, using all
default values.

(Spatial Model) File entry

This field displays the path to a data file used by the spatial
model. This field is only used by the SpatialMap and MapCubeFunction
spatial model types. For other spatial model types, this field is
deactivated. When active, the user may edit the path by editing the
contents of this entry field.

(Spatial Model) Browse button

This button summons a standard file dialog allowing the user to browse
to a file to use for the current SpatialMap or MapCubeFunction spatial
model. This file dialog functions in the standard "file/open" fashion
for whichever platform the modeleditor is running on. This provides a
convenient alternative to editing the text in the adjacent file entry
field.

(Spatial Model) Parameter Editor grid

This grid contains 7 rows and six columns. Each row corresponds to one
parameter which characterizes the current spatial model, and each
column corresponds to one of the 6 attributes of the parameter (name,
value, scale, min, max, free). The name column contains the name of
the current parameter, and this field may be freely edited (but the
likelihood code will probably not behave correctly if you change the
parameter names). The value column contains the unscaled value of the
parameter, and the scale column contains the scale factor for the
parameter. The product value*scale is the actual quantity used by the
likelihood software. The min and max columns display the allowed
minimum and maximum values for the value column (the unscaled
values). These fields are "live"; changing the value field
automatically invokes a range check using the min and max fields, and
the user is prevented from entering bad or out-of-range values. If the
user wishes to enter a value outside of the current range, the min
and/or max fields should be edited prior to editing the value
field. The final column (free) contains checkboxes. When a checkbox is
checked, that parameter is marked as adjustable by the likelihood
code, and will be modified to provide the best likelihood
estimate. The value specified in the value field is used as the
starting value for that parameter for the computation.

Menu commands

File menu

New

Create a new default model document and use it to populate the
editor. If the current document has been changed, the user is prompted
to save the changes before the new document is created.

Open...

Summon a standard file open dialog to allow the user to select a file
to load into the editor. If the user presses the Cancel button in the
dialog, the new file is not loaded, and the current document is
retained.

Close

Close the current document and create a new default document. If the
current document has been changed, the user is prompted to save the
changes before closing the document. This is functionally equivalent
to the New command (for now).

Save

Save the current document under its existing name. If the current
document has no name, the user is prompted for a name using a standard
file/save dialog.

Save As...

Save the current document under a new name. A standard file/save
dialog is summoned to allow the user to specify the path to the saved
file.

Export to ObsSim...

Convert the current model file to a format usable by the Fermi
observation simulator. Note that this capability is experimental -
only PowerLaw, PowerLaw2, BrokenPowerLaw, and BrokenPowerLaw2 spectrum
types are supported for the conversion, and only SkyDirFunction
spatial models are supported. If a model file cannot be converted
(usually by having an unsupported spectrum or spatial model type), the
program will likely crash. But this will be fixed RSN.

Exit

Exit from the modeleditor. If the current document has been edited,
the user is prompted to save changes prior to exit.

Edit menu

Cut

This item is a stub, and currently performs no function.

Copy

This item is a stub, and currently performs no function.

Paste

This item is a stub, and currently performs no function.

Undo


This item is a stub, and currently performs no function.

Source menu

Add Source

Add a new default source to the list of sources for this document. A
default source has a unique name based on the current number of
sources created. The default source is a PointSource with a PowerLaw
spectrum (with typical values for the parameters) and a SkyDirFunction
spatial model (pointing at the origin of the (RA,DEC) coordinate
system). The user may then edit any of these parameters as needed.

Remove Source

Remove the currently selected source from the list of sources in the
current document.

Add Point Source

Add a default point source to the list of sources in the current
document. The content of a default source is described in the 'Add
Source' item above.

Add Diffuse Source

Add a default diffuse source to the list of sources in the current
document. Currently, this fills in a default source just like the 'Add
Point Source' command, but the source name indicates a diffuse
source. This capability will be improved in a future version of the
modeleditor.

Add Fermi Catalog Sources

Add all sources from the Fermi Catalog within 5 degrees of a selected
region on interest (ROI) as defined by a user supplied Fermi event file.
Upon selecting this option a dialog box is presented that allows the
user to input the Fermi Catalog and event files, select diffuse model
files and model names and enter other parameters related to the source
selection.  Once the parameters are entered, all sources from the catalog
file that are within the ROI are loaded into the current model with their
parameters being free or fixed based on the selected input parameters and
their distance from the ROI center.

Add EGRET Diffuse Source

Add a diffuse source derived from EGRET data. The path to the file of
data for this model must be manually specified. A future version of
the modeleditor will automatically populate the file entry field based
on the user's environment.

Add GALPROP Diffuse Source

Add a diffuse source derived from GALPROP data. The path to the file
of data for this model must be manually specified. A future version of
the modeleditor will automatically populate the file entry field based
on the user's environment.

Add Extragalactic Diffuse Source

Add a diffuse source derived from extragalactic data. The path to the
file of data for this model must be manually specified. A future
version of the modeleditor will automatically populate the file entry
field based on the user's environment.

Sort Menu

Sort Ascending

Set sorts to be ascending.  This is the default action.  This selection
will be highlighted red when selected.  Selecting this will automatically 
reverse the order of the sorted list if it was previously in descending
mode.

Sort Descending

Set sorts to be descending.  This selection will be hightlighted red
when selected.  Selecting this will automatically reverse the order
of the sorted list if it was previously in ascending mode.

Clear Sorting

Removes any of the following selected sorted modes from internal memory
so that changing the sort direction (ascending or descending) does not
immediately change the list of sources.  It does not unsort the list
as no state is maintained of the previous condition of the list.

Sort by Name

Sorts all sources based on the Source Name field.  Case is ignored
for this sort (i.e. 'Source 1' and 'source 1' are considered to be the
same.

Sort by Position

Sorts all sources based on the RA and DEC parameters in the spatial
model.  The sources are sorted on RA first and then Declination.  If
the sources does not have a spatial model with the RA and DEC parameters
the source is sorted to the bottom of the list (in ascending mode.
They would be first in descending mode).

Sort by Distance from ROI center

Sorts all sources based on their distance from the center of the ROI
imported by reading the event file supplied when catalog sources were
imported.  This sort really on applies when sources from the catalog
are read in but if used on a model that didn't have a source catalog
input, the RA and DEC of the ROI center is considered to be 0,0.  If
the sources does not have a spatial model with the RA and DEC parameters
the source is sorted to the bottom of the list.

Sort by Source Type

Sorts sources based on their Source Type (either PointSource or
DiffuseSource).  Diffuse Sources are first in the list in ascending
mode and Point sources are first in descending mode

Sort by Spectral Type

Sorts all sources based on the Spectrum Type field of the spectral
model.

Sort by Primary Index

Sorts all sources based on their primary spectral index.  The name of
this index varies based on the Spectral Type model and is one of either
Index, Index1, or alpha.  If a model does not contain one of these
parameters, it is sorted to the end of the list.

Sort by Integral Flux

Sorts sorces based on the 'Integral' parameters in their spectral model.
This only applies to the PowerLaw2 and BrokenPowerLaw2 models.  Sources
with all other models are sorted to the end of the list.

Help menu

Help

Display this help document from the modeleditor interface.

About

Display a dialog which provides summary information on the modeleditor.

Notes

Models must contain at least 1 source.
